This is a demo application for the Lift web framework:

  http://liftweb.net/

The most up-to-date version is available at:

  http://github.com/mtye/lift-demo-CASE

This demo application was the basis of a presentation to the Chicago Area Scala
Enthusiasts (CASE) user group on February 18, 2010. You can find more
information about CASE at these web sites:

  http://groups.google.com/group/chicagoscala
  http://www.meetup.com/chicagoscala/

The methodology of the presentation was to briefly demonstrate a completed web
application, then use Git to "reset" the source tree to a blank application
template, explain the basic features of Lift, and then progressively add
features by "fast-forwarding" through the application's development with Git,
eventually arriving at the completed application demonstrated at the beginning
of the presentation.

The "completed" - i.e., the most recent - version of the demo app is found in
the "master" branch, and the starting point - a "Hello World" application
generated from the "lift-archetype-basic" Maven archetype - is available in the
"step0" branch. The other "step" branches - step1, step2, step3, etc. - are
incremental snapshots taken of the app after each new feature was added. Thus
the step1 branch is based upon the "Hello World" app in step0, the step2 branch
adds a feature to the step1 branch, and so on. By switching between branches
with Git, you can run, examine, and experiment with the app at each stage of
development.

An explanation of the changes made to each branch is available in the NOTES file
located in the root directory of the project.

To build and compile this application, you will need a Java JDK and Maven. If
you have followed the "Getting Started with Lift" instructions at:

  http://liftweb.net/docs/getting_started.html

and successfully created and run the "Hello World" app, you should be all set.

To switch between the incremental snapshots, you will need to install Git (if
you haven't already) and know how to use "git branch" and "git checkout"
commands. The manual pages for "branch" and "checkout" can be found here:

  http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/git-branch.html
  http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/git-checkout.html

If you are new to Git, you should start with either of these tutorials:

  http://learn.github.com/p/intro.html http://progit.org/book/

I hope you find this demo application helpful and informative. Please send any
feedback to work (at) marktye (dot) com.

Copyright Â© 2010 Mark Tye

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share
Alike 3.0 United States License. To view a copy of this license, visit

  http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/us/
